Group Operator in MongoDB (#1265)
section-engineering-education/engineering-education: articles/group-operator/group.md

---
layout: engineering-education
status: publish
published: true
url: /engineering-education/group-operator-in-mongodb/
title: Group operator in MongoDB
description:  Group operator is a very important operator in MongoDB language and it is a part of aggregation in MongoDB so this article will cover $group operator, its applications along with examples.
author: harit-joshi
date: 21:52:42 2021 +0530
topics: []
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
images:

  - url: /engineering-education/group-operator/hero.jpg
    alt: Group operator in MongoDB Image
---

> Group operator is a very important operator in MongoDB language and it is a part of aggregation in MongoDB.

Reviewer: Need a better into on Group operator. Also, discuss What is MongoDB shortly in the intro.

In this article we are going to learn:

1. What is the $group operator?

2. Examples for a better understanding of the operator.

3. Applications of $group operator.

## Aggregation

> Aggregation is an operation that processes the data to give a computed result. It basically involves stages or pipelines through which data is processed to yield a combined result. So pipelines are stages through which data is processed, more technically transformed into by the provided criteria.
>  
> Each pipeline is independent and receives the data of the previous stage and always remember that always the first pipeline will have direct contact with the data itself, not its transformed version, and can take advantage of indexes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Aggregation is an operation that processes the data to give a computed result. Aggregation operations group values from multiple documents together and can perform a variety of operations on the grouped data to return a single result. It basically involves stages or pipelines through which data is processed to yield a combined result. 

Pipelines are stages through which data is processed, more technically transformed into by the provided criteria. Each pipeline is independent and receives the data of the previous stage. Always remember that the first pipeline will have direct contact with the data itself, not its transformed version, and it can take advantage of indexes.
```

## What is $group operator?

> So $group operator as the name suggests groups the similar data by some specified expression and combines it into a single result or document. Just imagine like this suppose there are 15 people and they all have a similar hobby and if we say count all those people who have a similar hobby so let’s say 3 people have swimming as a similar hobby, 5 people have cooking as a similar hobby and so on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the name suggests, the `$group` operator groups similar data by some specified expression and combines it into a single result or document. 

Suppose there are 15 people and they all have a similar hobby and if we count all those people who have a similar hobby so let’s say 3 people have swimming as a similar hobby, 5 people have cooking as a similar hobby and so on.
```

Reviewer: `Suppose there are 15 people and they all have a similar hobby and if we count all those people who have a similar hobby so let’s say 3 people have swimming as a similar hobby, 5 people have cooking as a similar hobby and so on.`

It's not clear what you are conveying in this line. It's too long. Break it down properly so that it will be easier to read.

> So $group operator also works in a similar fashion. Let’s see its syntax in order to make this more clear :
> 
> `{ $group: { _id: <expression>, <field1>: { <accumulator1> : <expression1> }, ... } }`
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The $group operator also works in a similar fashion. Let’s take a look at its syntax:

`{ $group: { _id: <expression>, <field1>: { <accumulator1> : <expression1> }, ... } }`

```

An _id field in the output documents contains the distinct group by key. The output documents can also contain computed fields that hold the values of some accumulator expression grouped by the $group‘s _id field.

> Basically, the _id field here will take those fields by which you want to group the documents and it is compulsory to use _id here otherwise the operator won’t work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Basically, the _id field here will take those fields by which you want to group the documents and it is mandatory to use `_id` here.
```

### Important points to remember

> - Can not be used with the LogReduce operator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It can't be used with the `LogReduce` operator.
```

[
    {
        "_id" : ObjectId("5ffb0dd58591ec5a52d2afbd"),
        "name" : "Harit Joshi",
        "age" : 18,
        "gender" : "Male",
        "hobbies" : [
                "sports",
                "cooking",
                "gaming"
        ]
    },
    {
        "_id" : ObjectId("5ffb0dd58591ec5a52d2afbe"),
        "name" : "Maria Swartz",
        "age" : 27,
        "gender" : "Female",
        "hobbies" : [
                "sports",
                "swimming",
                "gaming"
        ]
    },
    {
        "_id" : ObjectId("5ffb0dd58591ec5a52d2afbf"),
        "name" : "Billy Marton",
        "age" : 34,
        "gender" : "Male",
        "hobbies" : [
                "singing",
                "cooking",
                "jogging"
        ]
    }
]
```

Let's say we want to find how many males and how many females are there in this document. In this short example, it is pretty clear that there are 2 males and 1 female.

```js
db.person.aggregate([ { $group: {_id: {gender: "$gender"}, totalPeople: {$sum: 1}} } ]).pretty()
```

Output:

```JavaScript
{ "_id" : { "gender" : "Female" }, "totalPeople" : 1 }
{ "_id" : { "gender" : "Male" }, "totalPeople" : 2 }
```

> Also, remember in order to make the $group operator work you must have to use an accumulator operator like $sum, $avg, $max, etc because as you know that the operator yields a combined result based on the grouping expression. Let's take another used case where this operator can shine. Suppose now we are interested in how many people have a similar hobby so how can we achieve that. Well it's not that much tough

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make the $group operator work, you should use an accumulator operator like `$sum`, `$avg`, `$max`, etc since the operator yields a combined result based on the grouping expression. 

Let's take a look at another use case. Suppose now we are interested in how many people have a similar hobby,
```

> we first need to make every hobby as a separate top-level field by using $unwind operator and then we have to do the same as we did in the first example,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We should make every hobby a separate top-level field by using the `$unwind` operator and then we have to do the same as we did in the first example,
```

```JavaScript
db.person.aggregate([ {$unwind: "$hobbies"}, { $group: {_id: {hobby: "$hobbies"}, totalPeople: {$sum: 1}} } ]).pretty() 
```

Output:

```JavaScript
{ "_id" : { "hobby" : "jogging" }, "totalPeople" : 1 }
{ "_id" : { "hobby" : "singing" }, "totalPeople" : 1 }
{ "_id" : { "hobby" : "cooking" }, "totalPeople" : 2 }
{ "_id" : { "hobby" : "gaming" }, "totalPeople" : 2 }
{ "_id" : { "hobby" : "sports" }, "totalPeople" : 2 }
{ "_id" : { "hobby" : "swimming" }, "totalPeople" : 1 }
```
## Applications of $group operator:

> 1.  Whenever we need to do some analytics on the data and need to find how many people fit in that analytics as we did in our examples $group operator can be very useful.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.  Whenever we need to do some analytics on the data and need to find how many people fit in a group as we did in our examples, the `$group` operator can be very useful.
```

Basically, the `_id` field here will take those fields by which you want to group the documents. It is mandatory to use `_id` here.

The $group operator does not remove the data from the database. It just aggregates multiple documents into a single document based on the field passed to the `_id` field.

### Important points to remember

- It can't be used with the `LogReduce` operator.

- When parsing and naming (aliasing) fields, avoid using the names of grouping functions or other operators as field names.

- When using count, or any grouping function, remember to include the underscore before the field name (sort by _count).

- Multiple aggregation functions can be on the same line but you can't include another function, such as a math function, on the same line of a query.

Now, let’s look at an example.

Suppose we have a collection of 3 people with their names, gender, age and hobbies:

```JavaScript
[
    {
        "_id" : ObjectId("5ffb0dd58591ec5a52d2afbd"),
        "name" : "Harit Joshi",
        "age" : 18,
        "gender" : "Male",
        "hobbies" : [
                "sports",
                "cooking",
                "gaming"
        ]

>     },

Reviewer: @HARITJOSHI1 You misunderstood me, Instead of just writing the syntax below the prerequisite section, Write like this:

---

Now, let’s look at an example.

Let's create a database.

```
// Command to create Database
```

Now, let's insert these documents into the database in a collection called person.

```
// Command to insert the documents
```

Now that we have some documents in the collection, we can use the $group to find how many males and how many females are there.

Reviewer: You don't have to explain any of those commands though. That's clear from the prerequisites section.

Author: Ohh okay I will update it accordingly.

```

Now, let's create a collection named `person` and insert multiple documents in that collection using `insertMany()` function like:

```bash
db.person.insertMany([
    {
        "_id" : ObjectId("5ffb0dd58591ec5a52d2afbd"),
        "name" : "Harit Joshi",
        "age" : 18,
        "gender" : "Male",
        "hobbies" : [
                "sports",
                "cooking",
                "gaming"
        ]
    },
    {
        "_id" : ObjectId("5ffb0dd58591ec5a52d2afbe"),
        "name" : "Maria Swartz",
        "age" : 27,
        "gender" : "Female",
        "hobbies" : [
                "sports",
                "swimming",
                "gaming"
        ]
    },
    {
        "_id" : ObjectId("5ffb0dd58591ec5a52d2afbf"),
        "name" : "Billy Marton",
        "age" : 34,
        "gender" : "Male",
        "hobbies" : [
                "singing",
                "cooking",
                "jogging"
        ]
    }
])
```

Now that we have some documents in the collection, let's use the `$group` to find the number of males and females in the collection.

```bash
db.person.aggregate([ { $group: {_id: {gender: "$gender"}, totalPeople: {$sum: 1}} } ]).pretty()

> ```

Reviewer: Explain each part of this code snippet.

Output:

```bash
{ "_id" : { "gender" : "Female" }, "totalPeople" : 1 }
{ "_id" : { "gender" : "Male" }, "totalPeople" : 2 }
```

For the `$group` operator to work, you should use an accumulator operator like `$sum`, `$avg`, `$max`, etc. since the operator yields a combined result based on the grouping expression.

Let's take a look at another use case. Suppose, let's say we are interested in the number of people having a similar hobby, We should make every hobby a separate top-level field by using the `$unwind` operator and then we have to do the same as we did in the first example:

```bash
db.person.aggregate([ {$unwind: "$hobbies"}, { $group: {_id: {hobby: "$hobbies"}, totalPeople: {$sum: 1}} } ]).pretty() 

> ```

Reviewer: Explain each part of this code snippet.

        "name" : "Harit Joshi",
        "age" : 18,
        "gender" : "Male",
        "hobbies" : [
                "sports",
                "cooking",
                "gaming"
        ]
    },
    {
        "_id" : ObjectId("5ffb0dd58591ec5a52d2afbe"),
        "name" : "Maria Swartz",
        "age" : 27,
        "gender" : "Female",
        "hobbies" : [
                "sports",
                "swimming",
                "gaming"
        ]
    },
    {
        "_id" : ObjectId("5ffb0dd58591ec5a52d2afbf"),
        "name" : "Billy Marton",
        "age" : 34,
        "gender" : "Male",
        "hobbies" : [
                "singing",
                "cooking",
                "jogging"
        ]
    }
])
```
Now that we have some documents in the collection, we can use the $group to find how many males and how many females are there. In this short example, it is pretty clear that there are 2 males and 1 female.

```bash
db.person.aggregate([ { $group: {_id: {gender: "$gender"}, totalPeople: {$sum: 1}} } ]).pretty()
```

Output:

```bash
{ "_id" : { "gender" : "Female" }, "totalPeople" : 1 }
{ "_id" : { "gender" : "Male" }, "totalPeople" : 2 }
```

> For the `$group` operator to work, you should use an accumulator operator like `$sum`, `$avg`, `$max`, etc since the operator yields a combined result based on the grouping expression.

Reviewer: @HARITJOSHI1 Please add a link to another article or documentation that explains other accumulator operators.

Let’s take a look at its syntax:

`{ $group: { _id: <expression>, <field1>: { <accumulator1> : <expression1> }, ... } }`

The `_id` field in the output documents contains the distinct group by key. The output documents can also contain computed fields that hold the values of some accumulator expression grouped by the $group‘s `_id` field.

Basically, the `_id` field here will take those fields by which you want to group the documents. It is mandatory to use `_id` here.

The $group operator does not remove the data from the database. It just aggregates multiple documents into a single document based on the field passed to the `_id` field.

### Important points to remember

- It can't be used with the `LogReduce` operator.

- When parsing and naming (aliasing) fields, avoid using the names of grouping functions or other operators as field names.

- When using count, or any grouping function, remember to include the underscore before the field name (sort by _count).

- Multiple aggregation functions can be on the same line but you can't include another function, such as a math function, on the same line of a query.

> 
> Now, let’s look at an example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Example

Now, let’s look at an example.
```

Suppose we have a collection of 3 people with their names, gender, age and hobbies:

> Let's create the database and to do that the syntax is  ```use <any name of your database> ``` and then create a collection named as person however you can choose any name you like and then insert multiple documents in that collection by using insertMany() function like ```db.<name of your collection>insertMany([{}, {}, ...])```.  For this example we are using database name as review and collection name as person.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's create a database:
```

```bash 
use review 
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, let's create a collection named `person` and insert multiple documents in that collection using `insertMany()` function like:
```

```bash
db.person.insertMany([
    {
        "_id" : ObjectId("5ffb0dd58591ec5a52d2afbd"),
        "name" : "Harit Joshi",
        "age" : 18,
        "gender" : "Male",
        "hobbies" : [
                "sports",
                "cooking",
                "gaming"
        ]
    },
    {
        "_id" : ObjectId("5ffb0dd58591ec5a52d2afbe"),
        "name" : "Maria Swartz",
        "age" : 27,
        "gender" : "Female",
        "hobbies" : [
                "sports",
                "swimming",
                "gaming"
        ]
    },
    {
        "_id" : ObjectId("5ffb0dd58591ec5a52d2afbf"),
        "name" : "Billy Marton",
        "age" : 34,
        "gender" : "Male",
        "hobbies" : [
                "singing",
                "cooking",
                "jogging"
        ]
    }
])
```

> Now that we have some documents in the collection, we can use the $group to find how many males and how many females are there.
> 
> Let's say we want to find how many males and how many females are there in this document. In this short example, it is pretty clear that there are 2 males and 1 female.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that we have some documents in the collection, we can use the $group to find how many males and how many females are there. In this short example, it is pretty clear that there are 2 males and 1 female.
```

```bash
db.person.aggregate([ { $group: {_id: {gender: "$gender"}, totalPeople: {$sum: 1}} } ]).pretty()
```

Output:

```bash
{ "_id" : { "gender" : "Female" }, "totalPeople" : 1 }
{ "_id" : { "gender" : "Male" }, "totalPeople" : 2 }
```

> To make the $group operator work, you should use an accumulator operator like `$sum`, `$avg`, `$max`, etc since the operator yields a combined result based on the grouping expression.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the `$group` operator to work, you should use an accumulator operator like `$sum`, `$avg`, `$max`, etc since the operator yields a combined result based on the grouping expression.
```

> Let's take a look at another use case. Suppose now we are interested in how many people have a similar hobby, We should make every hobby a separate top-level field by using the `$unwind` operator and then we have to do the same as we did in the first example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's take a look at another use case. Suppose, let's say we are interested in the number of people having a similar hobby, We should make every hobby a separate top-level field by using the `$unwind` operator and then we have to do the same as we did in the first example:
```
